Unofficial HAMP Calculator
(c) Dr Paul Brewer 2010
License: Free Software Foundation's General Public License (GPL) version 3

GENERAL BACKGROUND
During the recent credit crisis and recession in the United States, many
families were unable to make payments on their home loans.  Some borrowers
strategically defaulted because in some parts of the United States
a loan is non-recourse, the home value had dropped 30% or more, and the only
collateral for the loan was the property itself.  Most, however, were victims
of the economic recession, or unexpected expenses such as medical bills, or
unable to refinance a subprime high margin adjustable rate loan.  The
investors in these loans, such as the GSEs Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, Banks,
and other large investors, normally expected only a small fraction of the
loans to default. Usually a defaulted loan results in a foreclosure or
short sale.  With the number of loans affected, the government decided
to intervene in the marketplace.   

In response to these developments the government created the Home Affordable
Modification Program (HAMP), which details a specific algorithm to modify
an existing mortgage.

The full details of this algorithm are beyond the scope of this version
of the README file.  

The algorithm is interesting and worthy of independent study
The UnofficialHAMPCalculator represents such an independent study.

I, Dr Paul Brewer, am a private economist with no ties to the US Government
or the decision makers who created and implemented the HAMP program. Let's
make that part clear.  

HAMP ALGORITHM

Keep in mind that this is only one version of the procedure, and not
the whole procedure.  The policy must be considered as subject to change.

0. The goal of the HAMP program is to lower the loan payment to (31%) of gross 
income in cases where hardship in making the payments can be
established.  

First, various costs are added into the loan.  These are things like
unpaid accumulated interest from the period where the loan was unpaid.

Second, the interest rate of the loan is reduced, to as low as 2% by
0.125% steps, to attempt to meet the goal payment level.

Third, the length of the loan is increased to as much as 40 years.

Fourth, a balloon payment of non-interest bearing principal is created.
This is called "principal forebearance".  The investor can also choose
to forgive some of this principal, but is not required to.  

UNOFFICIAL CALCULATOR IMPLEMENTATION AND USAGE

The calculator is implemented primarily in two files and uses the 
prototype.js Javascript extension library -- a copy of which is included.

The UnofficialHAMPCalculator.html file contains the "skin" of the calculator.

The UnofficialHAMPLib.js file contains the necessary code to implement
the calculator.  

Other files are externallinks of documents the calculator was based upon,
and licensing information.

CONTACT INFORMATION

GMAIL drpaulbrewer if you are interested in assisting with expanding
the calculator, adapting it for your purposes,  or perhaps partnering
on some related application with the Unofficial calculator as a throwaway
prototype.  

I believe people have a right to get independent information about
how their mortgages may be modified and I have a website, ArmDisarm.com, 
that I am interested in devoting to benevolent entrepreneurship in this area.





